# Love Thy Fear? or Fear Thy Love?

The characters in the four stories all have a different all have some form of love or fear associated with them. It makes it seems as if fear and love are associated and give rise to each other. Everyone fears losing the things they love, and the characters in the stories showcase it. 

Starting with The Castaway. The primary bond which forges over time between Kiran and Nilkanta is a huge part of both of their lives. Nilkanta, for the first time, had felt he belonged somewhere while Kiran was also no longer lonely. However, thinking rationally, Kiran should have had realistic expectations for the bond and not given Nilkanta any false hope; since she was recently married and she has her own family to take care of, there would be no way that her family would allow her to bring Nilkanta along. Nilkanta, on the other hand had felt this sense of belongingness for the first time, and with it came an inherent sense of fear. The fear of losing this bond, in his childishness he didn’t realize some bonds are just not meant to be, and he cannot dream of staying with her; however, this fear takes over when he feels that Satish is becoming more important in Kiran’s life. So he takes a haphazard decision of stealing from Satish. This action had no positive outcome in any case, had he been caught, his temporary home would vanish, and even if he wasn’t, what harm does it bring to Satish except for a monetary loss? How would this in any way help him gain back Kiran’s attention? However, being a kid, he did not think enough and took action instead. Events took a drastic turn after Kiran defended him and later found the inkpot amongst his belongings, this shattered her trust while Nilkanta felt that Kiran only came to investigate his goods and his worst fear came true, he felt there was no trust between them and left without saying a word. Kiran also left shortly afterward while the dog who tagged along with Nilkanta was left all alone.

In the story Love Across the Salt Desert, Najab’s relationship with Fatimah is also one of love, forged by overcoming fear. Najab’s initial reserved personality comes to an end when he crosses the desert, illegally passes the border, and brings back Fatimah while avoiding smugglers and guards in the area. Bringing back Fatimah herself is not an easy task as she was already going to get married. Being from a traditional household, such runaway marriages are considered unholy and sacrilegious. This story shows how love helped them transcend all their fears. However, that is not the only love in this story. Najab’s mother gave her gold bangles to him to help him with his journey. She was accepting of her son’s love and supported him too. Najab’s Father also seemed to approve of their relationship towards the end as he waited for him anxiously. This shows another aspect that even though his mother must have been scared for his life, she didn’t let this fear overcome her love for him and allowed him to go on his journey.

In the story Engine Trouble, the theme is supposedly humor; however, humor comes at the expense of someone, in this case, the narrator. He faces lots of problems, both financial and social, just to keep that road roller and move it. However, the story shows an aspect of love and fear, which is easy to miss out. The aspect of fear can be attributed to the fear of further monetary loss. In addition, the narrator’s wife was also unhappy as her jewelry was at stake, which generates tensions between the two, thereby affecting their love. 

Finally, the Story Khagam, which is the uncanniest of them all. It showcases the love between Imli Baba and his beloved Snake Balkishen. Towards the end of the story, the power of that love is demonstrated as Balkishen does return to Imli Baba in some fashion. The person who killed him ends up becoming a snake and replacing Balkishen in Imli Baba’s life, losing his original identity. One can even argue there are many instances of fear apart from the obvious ones such as when the narrator hears hissing or sees something strange happening to Dhurjati babu. The more subtle indications of fear are instances such as Dhurjati babu killing the Snake, this might seem an act of evil; however, this cold-blooded murder might’ve been provoked by fear. His visit to Imli Baba might’ve spooked him. Also, since Dhurjati babu was ideologically upright, he feared the effect fake godmen have on society. Hence, he vehemently opposed the idea of even acknowledging Imli Baba or even visiting him. Another intriguing and notable incident occurs at the very start, which in hindsight may serve as an indication of the impending tale. As Dhurjati babu was talking about fake godmen, the anger was visible in his tone and choice of words, and at the same time, he also killed a fly. Though this holds no significance for the reader as he’s starting, but a correlation can be made, the fly wasn’t particularly disturbing Dhurjati babu according to the narrator’s account and still he killed it. It seems common for people to kill flies, but when we omit this incident from our analysis, isn’t that akin to saying that the Snake was more valuable than the fly? Dhurjati babu’s early encounter with fake babas has instilled fear and apprehension for them in his brain. He was also visibly agitated throughout the story, as noted by the narrator when he calls him impatient. Also, his style of talking and making sarcastic remarks makes it seem as if he believed he has the moral high ground. A combination of these factors might’ve just been the trigger for Dhurjati babu when he killed the Snake. He wanted to prove that Imli Baba is an impostor, and what better way than by taking away his prized possession. What Dhurjati babu fears here is what if Imli Baba isn’t fake? 

Across the four stories, love is showcased in different forms, be it a transforming love that makes a timid person like Najab change drastically or a life-changing love that made Nilkanta feel at home or the sacrifices which narrator’s wife made for the narrator due to her love for him or even the uncanny love between Imli Baba and Balkishen it just goes on to show how love can manifest itself from seemingly nothing and change people. Akin to love, fear is also showcased in numerous forms, be it Najab’s mother’s fear of losing him yet supporting him or Nilkanta’s fear of shattering his newly found home or even materialistic fear which the narrator had about the road roller and the intrinsic fear which Dhurjati babu had in regards to Imli Baba all of them go on to show how fear transforms us and hence the essay is titled should you Love your Fear? or Fear your Love? Because either way, you are in for one bumpy ride.