# What was Santokh Singh really saying? Reading between the Lines…

We all went through ‘The Assignment’ written by Saadat Hasan Manto, who is known for his partition literature which was critical of the authorities and exposed the dark times that passed. The first read-through made me clench my heart at the horrific description of the situation where peacefully coexisting societies had turned against one another. The end shocked all of us as the sliver of hope we expected when Santokh Singh arrived turned out to be a false positive, but further reading helped me see between the lines and realize there is much more to unpack here.

There are subtle hints planted throughout the story, which the reader misses until they have gone through the entire story. Specifically looking at Santokh Singh's appearance in the story, the sharp use of words that may seem trivial to the uninitiated indicates a different story altogether.

Considering how the story ended, the fear at Santokh Singh's arrival seems very justified as had the story ended differently, a different moral picture would have been painted as to how one should not judge a book by the cover and have preconceived notions, but in those horrific times, no one had the time or the liberty to indulge in these philosophical and ethical questions when their own lives were on the line. Everyone was scared for their life, as can be seen in the story when Basharat and Sughra struggled to decide to open the door or not while Mian Sahib kept telling them to open the door and said it must be Gurmukh Singh. He hadn’t yet lost faith and that was why he even decided to stay in the locality in the first place.

This also shows another angle of the partition. While other families were moving out, Mian Sahib decided to stay. The story references previous riots, and Mian Sahib explained how they happened from time to time and would just die down in a few days, but even his experience failed him as these riots were different. They weren’t the usual riots but had a much darker nature to them. A country was split into 2, sending hundreds of millions of people into sudden turmoil. This was no longer comparable to the ordinary riots, and Mian Sahib was proved very wrong at the end when we see Santokh Singh's acquaintances had arrived to burn down the house.

From the very start, the things which Santokh Singh said were very robotic. He did the obligatory greeting. He handed over the Seviyan and then just paused for a bit and reported his father's death. However, there is something hidden here. He does not refer to him as 'father' instead as Sardarji. The reason might be that he had come there to do something his father would never approve of, and maybe even using the term 'father' could waver his resolve to harm them. Hence, he might have chosen to drop the word and called him 'Sardarji', which seems to be distancing himself from his father and his teachings. 

Secondly, there is another point of interest. Santokh Singh tells them how his father instructed him to keep the tradition that he started alive. He uses the phrase 'one of the last things' here, indicating that he told him this just when he was dying. As the cause of death is unknown, a theory comes to mind which seems to bridge these gaps. Maybe Sardarji died during the partition riots, and when he was on his deathbed, he might’ve noticed the resentment his son now holds. This might be why he instructed him to keep the tradition going in hopes that maybe his son wouldn’t harm anyone. This also seems to fit why he told him this near his death bed it might be an attempt to stop his son from walking down the path of darkness.
Furthermore, the things Santokh Singh said lacked emotion. He didn’t directly express condolences on Mian Sahib's poor health instead said that his father would have been grieving had he been alive. Here he again mentions that he remembered Mian Sahib's kindness till his last breath, which seems to support the earlier proposed theory.

In the end, the story ends when he leaves and meets the people waiting near the house. He seems indifferent even after seeing how much concerned they were for his father. His rage already blinds him. He might have had a slight change of heart somewhere as he was walking away instead of directly burning the house, but still, that wouldn’t keep the blood off his hands as he is still responsible if they die. It may vanish physically but the guilty conscience remains which reminds me of the lines from Macbeth “Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood Clean from my hand?”.

